## Code repository associated with Wood et al., "Preemptive activation of hypolimnetic oxygenation improves control of Fe and Mn in drinking water reservoirs"

Submitted as a research article to Water Research. In this study, we conducted a six-year field study at two drinking water reservoirs in Southwest Virginia to investigate how hypolimnetic oxygenation (HOx) can be best utilized to control Fe and Mn concentrations.


<br>

### Guide for peer reviwers

---

This repository contains all of the spreadsheets and scripts associated with the manuscript. All data used in this manuscript have been previously published to the Environmental Data Iniative repository and are cited below.

This repository contains:
- the main R project (`Sed Traps Manuscript.Rproj`)
- processing and figure-generating scripts
  - `Manuscript1_Figures.Rmd`
  - `ABP_heatmap_for_Cece_20241018.Rmd`
  - `StratStartScript.R`
  - `StratificationDifs_ASL.R`
  - `Weather_com_figure_ABP.R`
- csv's containing pertinent information for data analysis
  - `StratStart2018_2023.csv`
  - `HOx_Ranges.csv`
  - `TO_Dates.csv`
- a folder to store all figures
  - `/figures`

<br>

#### Scripts

`ABP_heatmap_for_Cece_20241018.Rmd` generates figures 2-5 and S2. Knitting the R markdown will generate all figures and save them to the figures folder. `Manuscript1_Figures.Rmd` generates figures 6-9, S1, and S3-4. Knitting the R markdown will generate all figures, but will not save them to the figures folder. Change line 757 to `eval = TRUE` to save all figures. `StratStartScript.R` calculates stratification start dates from 2019-2023 and produces a csv. `StratificationDifs_ASL.R` produces figures for comparing stratification duration and buoyancy frequency in FCR and BVR. `Weather_com_figure_ABP.R` produces figures for wind, rainfall, and air temperature from 2018-2023.

#### CSV's
`StratStart2018_2023.csv` is the modified output of `StratStartScript.R`. This csv includes the stratification start date from 2018, which is not generated by the script. This date was selected based on analysis from _Howard et al. 2021_. The threshold for stratification in both methods is a difference in surface and bottom water density greater than 0.1 kg/m2. `HOx_Ranges.csv` contains the HOx on and HOx off dates and is used primarily for plotting purposes. See Table 1 for more detailed information on HOx operation. `TO_Dates.csv` contains the dates of fall turnover in both reservoirs from 2018-2023. This csv is used primarily for plotting.

#### Data and Literature Citations

1. Schreiber, M.E., C.E. Wood, A. Breef-Pilz, C.E. Bauer, G. Haynie, R. Keverline, M. Kricheldorf, and E. Tipper. 2024. Time series of total and soluble metal concentrations from Falling Creek Reservoir, Beaverdam Reservoir, and Carvins Cove Reservoir in southwestern Virginia, USA from 2014 through 2023 ver 8. Environmental Data Initiative. https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/584b1daf7f1541bc595aa3a9dd71a2c7.

2. Schreiber, M.E., C.E. Wood, C.E. Bauer, A. Breef-Pilz, G.K. Haynie, and E.M. Tipper. 2024. Sediment trap time series data for Beaverdam Reservoir and Falling Creek Reservoir in southwestern Virginia, USA 2018 through 2023 ver 8. Environmental Data Initiative. https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/5ee061465e62c29587042c58e7a91e13.

3. Carey, C.C., A. Breef-Pilz, V. Daneshmand, A.D. Delany, and R.Q. Thomas. 2024. Time series of high-frequency sensor data measuring water temperature, dissolved oxygen, pressure, conductivity, specific conductance, total dissolved solids, chlorophyll a, phycocyanin, fluorescent dissolved organic matter, and turbidity at discrete depths in Falling Creek Reservoir, Virginia, USA in 2018-2023 ver 8. Environmental Data Initiative. https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/7541e8d297850be7c613d116156735a9.

4. Carey, C.C. and A. Breef-Pilz. 2025. Time series of high-frequency sensor data measuring water temperature, dissolved oxygen, conductivity, specific conductance, total dissolved solids, chlorophyll a, phycocyanin, fluorescent dissolved organic matter, and turbidity at discrete depths, and water level in Beaverdam Reservoir, Virginia, USA in 2009-2024 ver 5. Environmental Data Initiative. https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/8f666b34c120aa5d2242964cf3147f90.

5. Carey, C.C., A. Breef-Pilz, H.L. Wander, D.W. Howard, G.K. Haynie, M.K. Kricheldorf, S. Tannheiser, and E.M. Tipper. 2025. Secchi depth data and discrete depth profiles of water temperature, dissolved oxygen, conductivity, specific conductance, photosynthetic active radiation, oxidation-reduction potential, and pH for Beaverdam Reservoir, Carvins Cove Reservoir, Falling Creek Reservoir, Gatewood Reservoir, and Spring Hollow Reservoir in southwestern Virginia, USA 2013-2024 ver 13. Environmental Data Initiative. https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/0df2b12c947e52a8d0240a75d20bbc1e.

6. Howard, D.W., Hounshell, A.G., Lofton, M.E., Woelmer, W.M., Hanson, P.C., and Carey, C.C. Variability in fluorescent dissolved organic matter concentrations across diel to seasonal time scales is driven by water temperature and meteorology in a eutrophic reservoir. Aquat Sci 83, 30 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00027-021-00784-w
